.TH HOW 1 "2026-03-23" "how 1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
how \- ask an LLM questions from the terminal
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B how
.RI [ question... ]
.br
.B when
.RI [ question... ]
.br
.B why
.RI [ question... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B how
is a one-shot CLI utility that sends a question to a large language model and
prints the answer.
The command name forms the start of the query: running
.B how to list files
sends \(lqhow to list files\(rq to the configured LLM provider.
.PP
Symlinks
.B when
and
.B why
allow different question styles.
For example,
.B why is the sky blue
sends \(lqwhy is the sky blue\(rq.
.PP
The response is tailored to the user\(aqs operating system, shell, and working
directory.
Answers are concise and fit on a standard terminal screen.
When a command is relevant, the LLM provides a brief explanation followed by the
exact command(s).
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B how
reads its configuration from
.IR ~/.config/how/config .
The file must have 0600 permissions.
.PP
The format is simple key=value pairs, one per line.
Lines starting with
.B #
are comments.
.SS Required keys
.TP
.B default_provider
The LLM provider to use.
Valid values:
.BR openai ,
.BR anthropic ,
.BR mistral ,
.BR google ,
.BR custom .
.TP
.IB provider _api_key
API key for the given provider (e.g.,
.BR mistral_api_key ).
.SS Optional keys
.TP
.IB provider _model
Override the default model for a provider (e.g.,
.BR openai_model ).
.TP
.B custom_endpoint
URL for the custom provider (required when using
.BR custom ).
Compatible with OpenAI-format APIs such as Ollama and vLLM.
.TP
.B allow_insecure_ssl
Set to
.B true
to disable SSL certificate verification.
Intended for local LLM servers with self-signed certificates.
.SS Example configuration
.nf
default_provider = mistral
mistral_api_key = sk-...
mistral_model = mistral-small-latest
.fi
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B HOW_PROVIDER
Override the configured default provider for this invocation.
.TP
.B HOW_MODEL
Override the configured model for this invocation.
.SH FOLLOW-UP DETECTION
.B how
caches the last exchange and automatically includes it as context when it
detects a follow-up question:
.IP \(bu 2
Within 2 minutes: always treated as a follow-up.
.IP \(bu 2
2\(en10 minutes: treated as a follow-up if the query is short (3 words or
fewer after the command name) or contains signal words like \(lqbut\(rq,
\(lqalso\(rq, \(lqinstead\(rq, etc.
.IP \(bu 2
After 10 minutes: never treated as a follow-up.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/how/config
Configuration file (must be 0600).
.TP
.I ~/.cache/how/history
Cached last exchange for follow-up detection.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (missing config, network failure, invalid response, etc.).
A diagnostic message is printed to standard error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B how to find large files
Ask how to find large files on this system.
.TP
.B why is the sky blue
Ask why the sky is blue.
.TP
.B how in rust
Short follow-up: repeat the previous question but for Rust.
.TP
.B HOW_PROVIDER=anthropic how to list containers
Use Anthropic for a single query.
.SH NOTES
The
.B ?
character is a shell glob.
Quote it or omit it when asking questions:
.PP
.nf
how "what is my ip?"    # quoted
how what is my ip       # omit the question mark
.fi
.SH AUTHORS
Mattias Lindblad
